I think on the horizon what I'm seeing
are opportunities to not only cure
diseases but prevent them. And what I'm
working on currently is really thinking
about how we scale crisper. We know the
technology works. It's very exciting.
There are other technologies
intersecting with it that make it
increasingly possible to put it into
different tissues in the body for
example. And what we need to do now is
scale it. So it's a it's a really
exciting moment.
genuinely amazing to be on stage with
you guys. I've learned a ton about
science and general thought and inquiry
from both Jennifer and Sid. So, thank
you both for being here. It's awesome.
Jennifer, let's start with you. So,
Crisper, obviously people have probably
a, you know, a 50,000 foot view of, but
let's make it a little bit more real
from them. like what um kinds of things
has crisper so far unlocked for what
kinds of things we can do for human
beings right now and then what do you
anticipate as the next kind of three to
five years of this
>> well crisper is a technology for
changing DNA sequences precisely and
it's an amazing tool that's now widely
used in research labs around the world
for doing essentially any kind of
biological work that involves molecules
and cells and what's really exciting to
me is that we're now just over the
13-year line with crisper and we're at a
place where it we know it's useful in
human beings for curing genetic disease
that's actually been done. Maybe we'll
talk about that and I think on the
horizon what I'm seeing are
opportunities to not only cure diseases
but but prevent them and what I'm
working on currently is really thinking
about how we scale crisper. We know the
technology works. It's very exciting.
There are other technologies
intersecting with it that make it
increasingly possible to put it into
different tissues in the body for
example. And what we need to do now is
scale it. So it's a it's a really
exciting moment.
>> And what would you where do you think
crisper will have its first things for
human beings? Is it going to be in some
new medicines? Is it going to be a
particular kind of uh like genetic
diseases? What's the
>> Well, I guess uh it depends on what you
mean with your question. If you're
asking where is it going to have impact
on human beings in a big kind of global
sense if that's the question actually I
think it's going to be in agriculture.
Yeah, I think that's going to be the the
first uh major global impact. And the
reason is that it's already being used
to do things like create
droughtresistant rice, something our
institute is doing with scientists up at
UC Davis. And we're rolling it out in
other countries right now. We have
opportunities also to use crisper in the
microbiome. Those are the microbes that
populate not only our bodies but our
environment. Uh they populate bodies of
animals like cows that where they
produce methane. And so we have a large
program using crisper to dial down those
genes that are pumping out methane and
actually redirect that energy into
making milk and meat. So it's a I think
that's the space where I see the global
impact coming the soonest.
>> I actually didn't anticipate the crisper
for fixing climate change but that is
also really that's awesome. All right.
So, um, Sid, you know, as you know, we,
uh, Mana started with a dinner in a
Japanese restaurant in New York because
I just had this OI is going to make a
big deal for drug discovery and here's
why. And then that whole conversation
focused on cancer and rare diseases. So,
say a little bit about Manis and say a
little bit about kind of where we're at
on this.
>> So, yes, I think uh, all great companies
start on a napkin. Um, and so this was
another napkin moment. Rita and I were
talking a little bit about how uh AI can
change drug discovery and the ambition
of Manis is to create is to be
disruptive what I call all the way. So
starting from target identification all
the way to human clinical trials um I
think every step of that first of all is
highly inefficient right now because of
those inefficiencies drug discovery is
slow painful and thereby expensive and
every step of that can be become AI
native. Manis concentrates particularly
right now although this will broaden on
the actual molecular discovery uh which
is how do we find new kinds of molecules
that will affect human disease. Um we
use a lot of foundational work that um
Jennifer and her lab and her institute
are doing um to find out what the target
is. But once you know the target the
question becomes how do you drug that
target? How do you either turn it on or
turn it off depending on what the target
is? Three things about this that are
different or relevant. Uh number one is
that um there are there's not just one
way that a medicine is made. Medicines
now come in a vast number of different
classes. You can think about medicines
of course as small molecules like
aspirin and Tylenol etc.
>> Let's pause on Tylenol. But no, keep
going.
>> So small molecules. The second class of
medicines um uh is our biologics. So
antibodies for instance like herceptin
which is for breast cancer or um
rtoximab which is for lymphoma and
others that you might be taking for
asthma or other diseases. A completely
new class uh which we are very very
interested in is RNA as as a as a
therapeutic. there are now five odd RNA
approved RNA drugs and my prediction is
that within the next 10 years there'll
be 50 or so. So just to end up um what
Manis is trying to do is trying to build
in each case in each class of drugs I
have I've left out other classes gene
therapies uh etc. What Manis is trying
to build is foundation models uh based
on data to try to attack each of these
drug classes. Um and in each case to try
to make what we call molecular
generators
uh in so that you can try to start
making new molecules each in each of
these drug classes and then move these
into phase 1, phase 2 and phase three
clinical trials.
>> So say a little bit about cancer and say
a little bit about rare diseases. cancer
we now understand it quite a lot not
completely but at a molecular level uh
we we know that um one of the things
well cancer is a genetic disease it is a
disease in which uh genetic changes in a
cell either activate or inactivate genes
that will then drive malignant growth
and this growth is uh fueled by lots of
changes in the cell metabolic changes
and other you know the way the cells
absorb nutrients the way the cells move
and migrate etc. We also know that
cancer is a seed and soil issue. So
there is the seed of cancer itself but
it also has to flourish in a particular
environment. So there's an environmental
or micro environmental interaction.
Coming back to manis again um a huge
question and once again this we owe debt
uh to what's been happening in the
crisper world and we can talk a little
bit about that is to identify targets.
That's where we begin. We say here's a
relevant target which we think if we
either activate or inactivate it with
these various kinds of therapies that we
talked about we can make major inroads
in cancer. Last point is that one of the
challenges in cancer has been for a long
very long time has been combination
therapies. We know for sure that
combination therapies work in cancer and
without combination therapies you
inevitably develop resistance. The
advantage of having foundation models
across different um molecular entities
is that in some dream hope uh Manis
hopes to own more than one drug against
uh a cancer so that they these two drugs
can be then combined either into a
single molecular entity or go through
two parallel phase ones and then be
combined. Now this is very difficult to
do in industry. You can't ask Astroenica
and BMS to come to the same table
because of various reasons. You can't
ask them to come to the same table and
say, "Well, why don't you just combine
your drugs and see if it works or not?"
But this was possible in the 1950s. This
is how we cured acute lymphablastic
leukemia cuz the NC at the NCI you could
the the the scientists could say, "I'm
going to pull this drug from here and
I'm going to pull that drug from here."
And it ended up being eight drugs
>> that was necessary to cure all. you we
got about an 80% cure for children with
all. So that's one example of what why
we need you know as I said an end toend
system across molecular entities and we
need scale and that's where AI is very
helpful.
>> Well and then the other one AI and
prediction is a search engine and this
is a search problem. So speaking of
search problems, what um how do you
anticipate in the next three to five
years AI might uh help accelerate things
within the world of crisper? And of
course now I'm thinking about you know
uh you know droughtresistant rice,
methane etc. that that hadn't entered my
brain before but now it's there. What
are the some of the ways that the
acceleration of crisper its deployment
its ability to uh have scale difference
to doing the in both doing the science
and also in deployment. What do what are
some of the things you were hoping for?
>> Well, two things come to mind
immediately. One is crisper is a
technology that depends on understanding
what the genetics are of the disease or
process you're trying to change or
manipulate. So you got to know what the
genes do and how they interact and then
what manipulating them what the effect
of that might be. I think that's going
to be increasingly possible to predict
with AI based methods that will require
of course great data to train on. That's
one of the things that you know you you
and I have talked about this. It's one
of the things that I I see as a real
bottleneck in biology right now. you
know, you might, you know, if you're if
you're thinking if that sort of sounds
crazy to you because you're saying,
"Wait a minute, but biologists are
generating lots of data and a lot of it
is publicly available. What about all of
those uh, you know, data sets?" The
problem is that yes, there's a lot of
data, but most of it is not measured in
a way that can be easily combined with
other data. Meaning that, you know,
you've sort of got apples over here,
oranges over there. It's very hard to
combine them. And um it's surprisingly
difficult to get one's hands on even
though things are sort of publicly
available a lot of times the you know
key pieces of information are not and so
it just means that I think we have to be
very thoughtful about what kinds of data
will actually be necessary to enable
genetic discovery for the kind of you
know target discovery that you're
talking about as well as even
fundamental aspects of human biology or
the biology of anything else. So anyway,
so that's one area where I think AI is
going to increasingly have a big impact.
Um, secondly, I'm seeing a really
interesting, very rapid right now
development of AI based tools that can
predict molecular structure. So of
course, Alphafold, you may have heard of
that Nobel Prize winning discovery uh
that was recognized by the chemistry
Nobel last year. That's a technology
that we now we and probably most other
uh biologists that are doing molecular
work use almost daily in the laboratory.
It's a it's a tool that allows pretty
accurate prediction of the
three-dimensional shapes of proteins.
And not only that now, but also things
like molecules that interact with those
proteins, the way uh multiple proteins
might come together and what that
interaction would look like, how to how
to, you know, how to visualize that. Uh
why is that so useful? Well, it's it's
incredibly valuable for understanding
the functions of proteins and how you
might interfere with with them. And not
only that, what I'm now seeing is
increasing developments along the lines
of being able to predict entirely new
molecular structures. For example,
proteins that do things that um you know
that we where where you can you can
predict a structure and from the
prediction have a pretty accurate
representation of what the behavior of
that molecule will be even though it's
never maybe occurred in nature and never
been tested yet. And so and that's you
know we're not there yet. I don't want
to say that that's a solved problem but
I think it's going to be solved. I
didn't used to think so and now I do you
know and so I think that is also
extremely interesting and it doesn't
mean that we've solved drug discovery so
I would push back a little bit on some
of the things that Sid said in the sense
that you know human bodies are very
complicated you actually know that
better than I do but you know I think I
think it's it's really um going to be
very different to be able to predict
molecules that interact or even genetic
uh changes that might be beneficial and
then being able to um actually implement
that in a person that's still going to
be a hard problem to solve.
>> Yeah, maybe maybe I'll ask Jennifer
question but um first of all I agree
with you completely um and there's no
push back needed. I think that uh drug
development is going to continue to be a
very complex process but again the more
tools we bring in um maybe I'll make a
point and then ask a question. One thing
that occurred to me um while I was
coming here was that you know one of the
problems in using AI to do drug
discovery is that we've been relying uh
largely so far on what I call search and
fit models. Um so you create a library
of molecules known molecules or maybe
you can curate it somewhat and then you
find a pocket that pocket may not be
even might be a dynamic pocket in the
sense that might actually move in real
space and then you search the library
and try to fit them and there are many
programs that are actually some of them
publicly available. Um, one of the
things that is missing is a truly
foundation model um, in which you don't
search and fit but you generate
>> uh, new chemistry or new chemical
matter. Um, that's a really tough
problem. Um, and actually that's one of
the things that we're trying to do. It
occurred to me I have I'll make the
point and I'll ask the question. It
occurred to me that in a in a sense that
crisper was created a kind of foundation
model for exploring genetics. I don't
want to stretch the analogy too far, but
it's an interesting idea that you know
before this we we had some idea about oh
gosh you know here's a way to change a
gene maybe in cells etc etc but but
crisp established a programmable way um
and in some ways it was foundational
because it was it completely changed the
paradigm you know no one had thought
that this would be the way to do it so
that's that's the point but look my
question to you is the following and it
has to do with very much about what we
do as well is when we look we're in
target space in and to try to find
targets in either cancer or or other
diseases. A lot of the information is is
is either missing, not harmonized as you
said, or sometimes wrong. Um, and so I
guess my question is, can we do this
without humans in the loop? Um, in other
words, who's going to curate like there
are 10,000 papers out there. We know
that there's a reproducibility problem
in science. who's going to curate all of
the things to figure out, you know, 900
of those are right, 100 of those are
wrong. Um, and how do we go about
harmonizing all of this?
>> Yeah.
>> Small challenge.
>> Really uh interesting problem. Yeah.
>> Well, I first of all, I I think human
intervention will remain a thing. But
I'd love to hear if you guys don't
agree, but I it seems to
>> I think the pattern will change. Yes,
human invention will be there, but the
pattern of how humans intervene,
>> I mean, GBT, for example, uses enormous
human input, right, to to optimize. And
so, I don't think we're going to get rid
of that, but yeah, maybe it'll change. I
think um but but what you're asking
about is is a really interesting
challenge and I don't know how to solve
it which is that you know and this is
kind of well known in the in the drug
discovery and even the academic space
that a lot of the publications that come
out in the scientific literature are are
are wrong. you know, they're either I'm
not saying they're false or anything or
falsified, but it's just that, you know,
people uh interpret data that are faulty
for whatever reason except that you
don't know which ones, right? If I knew
if I knew the 10% or 20% or I don't know
what the actual percentage is, but you
know, if I knew the ones that were uh
that I could trust and all the ones that
I I should kind of ignore, that would be
fantastic. But that's the challenge. We
don't know that. I don't know how to
figure it out. I'd love to hear an AI
perspective on this, but the humans in
the loop perspective on this is that
generally speaking um crisper is such a
strong tool and because genetics is so
definitive
uh that often you know the I would say
first generation tools um there was a
lot of question of interpretability but
with crisper there's actually much less
of a question of interpretability maybe
uh in the sense that you know you when
you knock out a gene you can really show
that it's gone
Whereas you know people used to use
drugs and other mechanisms to do the
achieve the same thing. There's a
there's a kind of u there's a kind of
humans human experimentation where where
you can where reproducibility may have
actually gone up dramatically with new
tools including tools like crisper and
hopefully that will continue to happen
maybe. Yeah. One of the things I think
will happen is and and I don't know how
close or how much work but it's totally
doable is you'll have basically be able
to have AI review of all the different
papers and it can do a prediction score
of how likely does it think it's
accurate and then you get a feedback
loop because then you go okay this one
seems important because you do important
and accuracy measure okay let's go
measure reme-measure this one and then
that's a feedback loop to the AI of you
said this was highly unlikely to be
accurate but it was now learn that as
you're going and then the other one is
oh this one was inaccurate and it was
important for us to figure out that it
was inaccurate right and so you can get
a prediction score to then get back to
the human in the loop you know kind of
looking at that's that's line of sight
>> I love the idea
>> but I remain skeptical
>> well in the words of Ethan Mullik the
worst AI you're ever going to use is the
AI you're using today we're working on
it
>> fair enough okay
>> um so imagining into the future 25 years
what we're doing with the science and
technology, how might the practice of
medicine be radically different?
Everything from cancer to you know
obviously there's um you know uh there's
diseases which affect you know many many
people where the economic model is not
for it. What are some of the things that
you would be you would cast your hopes
for? I'm not looking for scientific
prediction as much as you know kind of
like okay 25 years maybe this.
>> Oh I'm on the spot first. Oh dear. Uh
well gosh 25 years that's that's a
25 years that's that's a that's a long
that's a long time um in in this world I
time um in in this world I have to say.
have to say. But I guess what I'm hoping
But I guess what I'm hoping it's more of
it's more of a hope that will happen and
a hope that will happen and I think
I think we're seeing the seeds of it
we're seeing the seeds of it right now.
right now. One is that we're going to
One is that we're going to have crisper
have crisper as a standard of care for
as a standard of care for rare disease.
rare disease.
>> I think it's happening. I do. But
there's work to be done to make that a
reality. One is you know we got to
reduce the cost. Oh dear. Uh well gosh
reduce the cost. We got to make it
easier to manufacture.
>> But, you know, frankly, these are
solvable problems. We got to convince
payers that they need to cover the cost,
>> right? I mean, these are these are
things that need to happen, but they are
going to happen. They will
>> and I hope they happen in 25 I hope they
happen in less than 25 years. I do too.
And the other thing that I'll just
mention is that and I and I sort of
briefly um alluded to this earlier is
that I really hope that a gene editing
technology like crisper becomes a
preventative as well. Imagine a day when
we all have access to our, you know, DNA
sequences. we have enough insight into
the genome that we can say there's a few
genes there that I'd like to you know
twirl the knobs on because that that
makes you know this this one makes me
susceptible to cardiovascular disease
that one makes me susceptible to di
diabetes things like that and crisper
were capable of going in and you know
changing those genes in the right target
tissues to have a preventative effect I
think that would be extraordinary and
you know amazingly there already are
companies not only academics but
companies that are that have that vision
and are working on that for
cardiovascular disease in particular. So
again, I think it's there's a good pro
uh possibility that that will actually
become a reality.
>> And since since we're in overtime, quick
quick two two quick points. Number one
is um I do see I do predict a much uh
cheaper more efficient uh global
distribution of medicines. Um we uh we
made TE- cells as you know uh one of my
companies made the first T- cells cart
T- cells in India. uh they cost $600,000
in the United States. So we're selling
them for $40,000 in India. Um probably
the 50th patient has now been treated.
Um so global distribution of all of this
because these are you know remember the
price of the first computer to the price
of the uh um to a a PC that you buy
today is radically different. And number
two, I think of all in line of sight of
all diseases, I think we should pay much
much more attention to global diseases.
In fact, well, that's one of Maris's
challenges. And I think that it's
possible using all these technologies,
including what we're developing uh and
including crisper to really think about
eliminating some global infectious
diseases such as malaria, um
drugresistant tuberculosis and several
others. I think that will have real
global impact and u as much as you know
uh rare diseases cancer etc. So those
would be my two predictions. So thank
our two geniuses.